
Dear Ableist
============

One who believes that people with disabilities need to be fixed or cannot
function as full members of society


[Facilitated Growth](./vision.md 'Previous')
⇜
[Neurodiversity](./README.md 'Main')
⇝
[Sensory Garden](./garden.md 'Next')


Sister Act
----------

She told me in gushing commentary about how much she looked forward to me moving
in with the family.  She hoped to participate in cathartic conversations.
Instead, she's bailed out of every single topic I've raised in overwhelm and
tears.  Its almost as if she's allergic to talking about anything but her own
experience (and there is alwyas more than enough of that emotional work to go
around).  She keeps saying "Sorry, I didn't know" after acting on ableist
assumptions that have clearly been called out as problematic while she nodded
along with apparent agreement or recognition.

She expressed excitement about including me.  I have been actively excluded at
every turn.  Instead of focusing on learning about affects and mitigation
strategies regarding my recently confirmed sensory processing disorders, she
continues to manipulate our shared environment to her unspoken and entirely
egocentric preferences in an uninformed approach to property management.  This
is our mother's house, but she acts like she holds dominion.

She said I had to meet her BFF Sam (a coworker turned (codependent) friend).  I
was assured that Sam would jump in to help me sort out my application for
Medicaid benefits (having been without health insurance for a year already).
When I expressed frustration with the horrible user experience, I was sent
screenshots and "it should"s instead of anything at all resembling direct
support of my inquiries or lacking access to accommodations.  I still haven't
met Sam, almost a year later.

Sis screams at full voice into the faces of her children because of their
confused and tearful reactions to her behaviorism.  I explain monotropism
and the tie into apparent slow reactions or changes of focus.  She continues
exploding with "Stop!" more often than setting a context and redirecting focus
in anything resembling loving gentle guidance.  She continues drinking heavily
and denying her alchoholism or cigarettes have any affect on the situation
(though she's always ready to cast blame and villify her baby daddy while
demonstrating the exact same behaviors).  Even while she complained her booster
shot had knocked her out she drank away the day, wobbly AF by the time she
stumbled down into the basement overflowing with unused and unorganized trifles
and crafts and broken toys and clothes EVERYWHERE!!!

She immediately greets anyone but me in her vicinity, day in and day out.  Her
only direct communication to me comes via interruptions of conversations with
my mother that didn't include her (until she barged in uninvited).  The only
outreach hinging on how much the topic relates to my vacating the house.  I
didn't even once talk to her about my graduate school application, but she sent
a heady message of congratulations on the day I got my acceptance letter.

I see now why it took weeks to get any feedback at all on repeated direct
requests for engagement, before moving across the country by myself during the
peak of pandemic denial and the worst wildfire season I've ever seen.  While I
was reaching out, feeling gaslighted and abused, she talked the big talk in
conversation with others while leaving my simple and urgent request untouched.
The totality of the feedback I got was "I don't think you played the victim",
nevermind that there were multiple other questions included along with urgent
requests for time in conversation about MY topics (NOT the way she constantly
made everything about her the minute a basic shared understanding was reached)
while I remained desperate to sort through all the ways my partner of 12 years
was actively abusing me.

I have burned through every single drop of patience I could have possibly
mustered, given the utterly disabled and broken state in which I arrived.  Not
even once has she consulted with me in advance of making changes to the local
environment;  noisy loosely mounted yard decoration and high treble chimes
continue to be hung up in winds readily acknowledged as higher than normal.
There was never once a hint of direct inquiry as to why I had repeatedly taken
them down each time I had discovered them clanging noisily in recent weeks.
Today I pulled five seprate sets of chimes down immediately after joining my
mother in doing a chore she had asked of my sister the day prior (in prepration
of a contractor visit).  It wasn't until that moment that I realized the reason
for my horribly restless night!  I imagine it also accounts for the sudden
shutdown I experienced yesterday evening despite very carefully maintaining my
spoon collection.

This occurred less than a week after I pleaded for consideration of enforcing
bans on unnecessary noise.  I pitched a 12 hour per day ban of noise making for
the sake of noise making (knowing full well that sensory seeking behaviors
abound in this household).  I was met with blank stares of obvious surprise at
the time but Mom had the wherewithal to connect her usage of the dishwasher and
vacuum to my distress without pathologizing my behavior.  On her own, because
she has taken the time to engage with and discuss the topics I've been raising,
she came to the conclusion that it would be best to avoid running the dishwasher
or laundry machines until I was known to be out of the house long enough to
complete the cycles.

My sister is presenting an utter lack of personal accountability.  I see her as
practically a child developmentally, but she considers herself expert in child
rearing and the management of poor bahavior (especially when considering myself
having zero dependents).  She's been made into a tool for the benefit of her
money grubbing behaviorist bosses (e.g. she's claiming a 13 year career in
hateful othering treatment as superior to my lived experience and resulting
consideration of the need for others to own their role in my socially disabled
daily experience).  She still holds entirely unconsidered contempt for
disability.  Her internalized bias and anger is supervolcano level, and she's
not talking about it with anyone who is witnessing her behavior (here again her
adherence to behaviorism has made her wise enough to know that unless its seen
it isn't something anyone can call out).  Her 7 year old exhibits a more
profound emotional intelligence.


