
Emerging Activism
=================

Always present, now unapologetically promoted


[Autistic Burnout](./burnout.md 'Previous')
⇜
[Neurodiversity](./README.md 'Main')
⇝
[Getting Involved](./engagement.md 'Next')


Wrong Template
--------------

Over a handful of years my struggle to define and obtain the help I need
addressing challenges specific to socially exacerbated disability exploded into
epic proportion.  [Allistic](./glossary.md#allistic) [allopathic](./glossary.md#allopathic)
medical practitioners bullied and cajoled with ableism and derision of my pathos.
When lucky enough to afford the splurge, well intended naturopathic and bodywork
acted as salve or poultice, symptom specific and lacking necessary overarching
perspective.  I too was lacking much needed perspective in having gone
undiagnosed for more than forty years.  Scrambling to maintain the house I was
just barely affording in personally tragic years leading up to the horrors of
the pandemic (which too many of us know all too well) proved too great a
challenge and I've lost a decade of investment in the property at which I
fully intended to retire.

I do my homework and arrive prepared for interviews yet only very rarely depart
with a sense of having been helped vs. dealt with, tolerated.  Each specialist
defers to another and all collectively avoid accountability behind the banner of
a business.  Nowhere to be found is support for navigating bewildering and ever
changing rulesets and protocols for how to avoid bankruptcy while securing
desperately needed care.  Nobody is assigned the role of concierge, a case
worker or fimiliar who, also familiar with the medical industrial complex,
guides one toward relief....  This role, I am told, does not exist.  It is not a
benefit one may obtain.  Yet Youtube videos from Amsterdam describe weekly
visits with assistants aiding in planning the week ahead and my father had such
a thing while recovering from brain surgery in Denver, so it would appear that
it does indeed exist but it simply is not going to get coded by a clinic near
you any time soon.

I am not fundamentally broken;  I have been broken down by oppressors.


Peer Pressure
-------------

I hit all of my early career goals by the age of 40.  White privilege was the
only thing tipping scales in my favor, but I didn't know that at the time.
Attempts at pushing through to the next level without knowing how to navigate
the hurdles inherent to autism broke me.  Where it wasn't difficulty accessing
benefits attached to the jobs where I've struggled more with each passing year
to keep pace (almost never getting peers to buy in with even the most simple
accomodations), it was both implicit and explicit bias preventing the slightest
glimmer of a chance at truly satisfying and fulfilling work which afforded a
roof, meals, and healthcare.

I was only able to hold pace with about 10-20% of my 40 year old capacity
during my forty-fifth year of life.  Ongoing recovery from burnout hinged on
discovering people like me online.  The disability and activist communities
adjacent to autism and cooccurring medical conditions held open the flood gates
and allowed me to snatch a roughly sketched map of the landscape throughout
pandemic year one (having cut my teeth on how to Twitter while ranting in
support of BLM protests since Juneteenth 2020).

Organizations flooding media outlets with propaganda vilifying autistic people,
silencing and othering ~2-4% of everyone we see, is business as usual lately.
Scaremongering triggered parents with assumptions proven false decades ago,
headlines lately report on an "epidemic of autism" befalling our country at the
behest of organizations spending only tiny slivers of operating budgets on
initiatives guided by autistic people for autistic people.  They flood media
streams pumping eugenics and hatred.  The true epidemic is in their treatment of
traumatized children, yielding traumatized adults an order of magnitude more
likely to meet the end of their lives in suicide, using the only purported
therapy for so many (which has been recognized as torture the world over when
applied to other populations).  Compliance to the narrow limits of
[neurotypical](./glossary.md#neurotypical) standards must not continue.

Nothing about us without us!

