
Lacking Agency
==============

Four decades of gaslighting doesn't wash off easily


Reign of Shame
--------------

I've been racing to adapt to unrealistic expectations for that long, simply not
knowing better.  Childhood sexual abuse at the hands of a barely mature predator
who moved to the house at the end of the block one summer led to neglect because
I couldn't possibly mean the horrible things I was saying about him or how he
involved my infant sister in his debauchery.

Summers during college were spent toiling as 2nd to a general contractor and
property maintenance contractor.  His eyes were more often on my legs than the
road as we travelled between sites.  At least 3 different times while swapping
tools from the trailer he asked me to shower with him.  It was the only job I
applied to which responded with any interest beyond "reimbursement" schemes.

My fiancee in college, a month before her graduation, announced she didn't love
me any more and that she would move home at the end of the term.  No other
explanation forthcoming, I just didn't get to be in that relationship any more.

My boyfriend the next year offered me an ultimatum: declare myself gay and
denounce any desire for women to maintain the relationship, or maintain my out
bi status without him.  It was a cold and lonely walk of shame that morning.

I moved across the country, to a place I had zero desire to live, in support of
a wife who never did obtain that masters degree during our 7 year marriage, the
one I solely worked to support while awaiting my chance to focus on studies post
securing employment with her fancy new credentials.

And I lost jobs because nobody was willing to examine my distress ....

I helped my partner move and buy her first house and supported her through the
difficulties of late lives and deaths of both her parents.  It took 6 months to
get her to read even a single book about the topic that has upended my entire
outlook on life.  She disowned her sisters over lack of support before, but now
she communicates with them more often than I.  She cut me out of most of her
daily life without any explanation, yet still takes any benefit I offer,
begging patience as she works through it on her own.

And I lost jobs because nobody was willing to provide accomodations ....


Ill Fit
-------

My medical coverage has changed a dozen times in the last couple of years and
most of the care I've received has not been covered.  I'm required by law to
bear the expense of insuring my health against the profits generated by a
system doing more to actively harm than help me.  Both of my last two primary
care physicians ignored my pleas for help resolving pain.  Most recently I was
railroaded with two improper psychiatric diagnoses by an internist with zero
psychiatric or psychological credentials supporting their medical record notes.

My retina specialist called me aggressive as she redirected and ignored direct
questions, forcing her agenda despite clear up front messaging about my intent
for my first visit in over 5 years (which every single staffer pointed out).  I
was obviously suffering sensory overload, yet *I* was the aggressor.  She got
another woman to lurk in the doorway without introduction and corroborate her
position, more notes.

Carceral systems (not limited to criminal justice, medical complex, psychology)
have always put me off with their transparent duplicity.  The whole mess reeks
of "do as I say not as I do"-ness.  We are beholden to those very systems for
any chance at relief from the very problems that any providing those systems
proliferate during their wanton manipulation of our autonomy or environment.

I see no way beyond this for anyone outside of solidarity in opposition.

