
Autistic Burnout
================

An impactful reminder that I'm not in charge


[Lacking Agency](./agency.md 'Previous')
⇜
[Neurodiversity](./README.md 'Main')
⇝
[Emerging Activism](./activism.md 'Next')


Loss of Control
---------------

Just as I started to relax into the world of adulting, universal power reared
up to remind this fortysomething about impermanence.  I have worked within
networking and web application technology spaces since the turn of the century,
but couldn't seem to produce at anything like the speed of my peers.  Often, and
especially since turning 40, I've had to volunteer most of my free time just to
keep apace of peers and meet ever more unreasonable or non-negotiable terms of
employment.  I could not figure out what I was doing wrong, how I was missing
the mark.  I was following the same advice, learning from the same people....

Loved ones have been quick to remind me about their discomfort with the
frequency of inevitable job changes in my field (I too would prefer stable long
term funding and actually transitioned less often than peers throughout my
career).  I count only a single reporting manager who fostered my growth in any
mutually acknowledged way over more than two decades spent actively seeking
mentorship.  All others were gatekeepers, [shibboleth](./glossary.md#shibboleth)
holders, pushing their own agenda while ignoring and demanding ever more from
reports.  Frankly speaking, anyone asking a team member to "socialize
information" among the team is enforcing ableism.  Day by day, I witness more
people abdicate their basic human responsibility in similar ways. The more of it
I see, largely with the help of amazing activist communities on social media,
the more I feel compelled to scream into the void lest I ruffle any feathers
with my "aggression" (e.g. overwhelming distress).

Over the late 2010s I came to self-identify as probably, most likely, don't
want to do anything like appropriate, autistic.  By the time I fumbled through
enough conversations intended to open conversation and discovery which ended up
being taken as outright rage filled tirades) I was forced into choosing between
subterfuge or suffering silently.  I own this as someone who gets shut down more
often than having their queries answered by supportive and open minded
information seekers ready to collaborate.  Once solidarity with the
[#BlackLivesMatter](https://twitter.com/hashtag/BlackLivesMatter) movement was
undeniably demonstrated worldwide during a 2020 northern-hemispheric summer
filled with protest all was laid bare.  The hate-feuled underpinnings of this
failed social experiment once known by some as America the Great overwhelmingly
demands compliance in exchange for privilege from anyone who passes as a
white/male/cis/straight person.  With this knowledge, silence is violence.

Once I knew I was autistic with some certainty, literally asking for medical
leave and access to help sorting out an obvious imbalance in perceptions and
expectations wasn't acceptable.  The systems I was maintaining and expanding,
using methods contrary to *every* recommendation from team member contributors,
for the benefit of the defunct Innovation Force leadership at a major health
insurance provider were paltry examples of what we could have built had emphasis
been placed on intersectional inclusion over cross-departmental intra-company
leverage.  I blew my top upon learning directly from HR leadership that the (3rd
in a row) manager to whom I'd reported handfuls of unanswered concerns and
complaints never once forwarded or investigated pleas for help resolving ongoing
harassment.  Only my use of anonymous tip lines provoked any positive change
during my tenure there.

A finely honed interview engine resulted next in what would appear to most as a
great opportunity with a booming subcontractor in federal health care web
applications.  Months later their position was that "both of the times they
provided requested accomodations" they were going above and beyond the call of
duty.  My reminder that some accomodations require continual effort, and that my
recently confirmed diagnosis secured my right to claim effort due, was not taken
well.  Cries of favoritism resounded.  They had done nothing at all in terms of
neurodiversity planning or engagement until I introduced the ideas of employee
resource groups and internal advocacy and support of marginalized groups.  What
they demanded was full time work toward at least two separate sets of roles and
responsibilities simultaneously; as long as I delivered as much code as peers
they would "let me continue".  I ended up resigning from that job on two
separate occasions with a total of three months dedicated to sisyphean struggle
bookended by my onboarding and eventual departure.


Breaking Down
-------------

Discovering myself enmeshed within a terrible burnout without a single ally
available for verbal ventilation was terrifying.  The mere fact that I was
unable to effectively [script new conversations](./glossary.md#echolalia) and
the only people near were mixed up in my trauma left few options beyond
reclusive silence or bombastic presentation until I wrestled with the cognitive
dissonance long enough to start gleaning anything of enduring value from the
rubble.

As for what this phenomenon, autistic burnout, looks like when manifest...?  Do
everyone a favor and do a web search if you're unfamiliar.  Strongly supported
[#ActuallyAutistic](https://twitter.com/hashtag/ActuallyAutistic '#ActuallyAutistic on Twitter')
and [#AutisticPOC](https://twitter.com/hashtag/AutisticPOC '#AutisticPOC on Twitter')
activists have already exposed that free labor so be sure to drop a tip,
[buy a coffee](https://ko-fi.com/gurumojo), and subscribe via whatever links
they provide to acknowledge that you are learning from entrepeneurs and
activists who strive daily against white privilege, bigotry, and insolence just
to meet basic needs.  The force multiplier applied when facing multiple fronts
of marginalization is poorly recognized, and statistics for that too, are only a
search form submission away....

For me burnout manifested as disability, estrangement, forced relocation,
financial ruin, an ever constricting field of options for support amounting to a
sum total of rehashing all the ways I staved off burnout over a multi-decade
career until the effort finally and fully stopped me in my tracks.  I have seen,
all too often, disabled people explicitly having to refuse advice preemptively.
When I arrived at that point and said it kindly I wasn't heard.  When I added
resonance or volume or semantic tweaks (and was obviously understood) I was
resolutely shut down.  What I have yet to access (excepting a few marvelous
examples of humanity) is much belated inquiry about how my needs differ from
what I've done to date, repeatedly, and consistently, while following along with
those happy to gaslight and bug out the moment shit gets real.


Taking Control
--------------

Demanding rights is not aggression; it is progress toward accountability by a
previously and currently oppressive force.  Using the rights hard won by people
marginalized repeatedly over decades of fighting within the system to provide
rule of law supporting universal truths is not asking too much; it is only one
step toward demonstrating, living by example, the messages typically isolated
within lofty oratory or public children's programming or job postings.  Protest
is not anarchy; it is one of few voices left after politeness politics and tone
policing endeavor to squash protected speech.  Refusing to treat the mythical
business needs as collectively more important than basic humane treatment of
others is not career suicide; it is breaking down failed social constructs for
the benefit of future generations.  Nobody is less than.  Read that again:
nobody is less than anyone else.

That said, please take a moment to consider the [LISTEN Movie](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=H7dca7U7GI8).
It provides insight from marginalized people who have too often been ignored.

Any time I made the mistake of speaking openly about my discomfort navigating
bias via social dynamics or new arrivals ruining stable working relationships
I was immediately entrenched in defense of my own behavior instead of unlocking
access to much needed counsel and support.  Emotional flashbacks lock me into
trauma responses after cascades of being cornered and blamed lead to inevitable
implosion.  This yet to be acknowledged torture was almost exclusively because
an overpaid and disconnected executive was bored by our misunderstood pace of
progress and decided adding headcount would solve whatever problem there
remained for his people to work out on their own.  You know ... as a personal
or career growth exercise, right?

It has been messy work.  Imagine trying to overcome these hurdles time and again
for decades without knowing anything about even the most basic essentials for
autistic success....  This was simply because I had no way to know without
external advocacy or surviving enough failure to learn things the hard way!

The first time I came out to an employer as autistic the immediate reaction was
a sharp intake of breath and expression of remorse.  I know better than to
accept that kind of disparagement now.  I express this with certainty because my
neurodivergence is nothing short of one shining example of the beautiful
variation in human expression our fragile world hosts.  Disparagement due to
unconscious bias or preference alone will not be tolerated.  I expect no less
from everyone I meet than to continually seek to know better and do better.

Any time I have the spoons, I look forward to advancing this discussion.

