
My Flavor of Autism
===================

Once you've met one autistic person, you've met one autistic person

[Setting the Stage](./introduction.md 'Previous')
-- [Neurodiversity](./README.md 'Main')
-- [Intersectionality](./intersectionality.md 'Next')


Setting the Stage
-----------------

Autistic advocates provide messaging online quite contrary to most colloquial
wisdom about autistic experience.  My attempts at accessing much needed care or
support through the years, and especially in reference to learning about these
recent revelations has been fraught to say the least (PhD confirmation came at
age 44 in my case).  My only true and steadfast lifeline has been the Twitter
communities frequenting #ActuallyAutistic and #NEISVoid conversations.  Every
single other therapeutic process or tool (outside of the beta blockers that
allowed me to safely descend burnout peak in the cortisol mountain range) has
done more to set me back than build my health and well being.  When I haven't
been allowed the driver's seat, or I've followed advice from outside my tribe,
participants suffered terrible wrecks.  Not because of incompetence or malice
for the most part, though I have yet to learn patience in the face of intended
negligence, it was because nobody else in so many scenes playing out over my
adult life was in the position to call out the abhorrent act of excluding others
by preference alone.  I was, and through so doing I learned that in the wrong
hands, knowledge of fear or disability can be wielded as quite a weapon.

Acknowledging the privilege in my life because of how I look at a glance or on
paper, I have fought for underdogs at every opportunity and I have paid dearly
for it in comparison to the privilege and ease I witness regarding neurotypical
examples from my census peer group in my chosen field (e.g. anyone capable of
passing through modern cultures as a straight white/cis/male builder of internet
things).  Study of Black History in college, and recent inspiration from the
public outpouring of support for the Black Lives Matter movement and the
ramifications for oppressed classes of people everywhere, coupled with deep
introspective work aiming at unwinding the internalized ableism and racism baked
into me by the state's tireless pursuit of control at any cost has served to
calcify loose focus into a spearhead serving social justice.  I am discovering
my true purpose.  I am out and proud!


Identity vs. Diagnosis
----------------------

While the doctor who confirmed my self-identification admonished me to embark
into social skills training with an occupational therapist, and counselling via
cognitive behavioral therapy, and genetic testing for common conditions found
frequently co-occurring, with current diagnostic nomenclature, she decided that
my behavior and evaluation participants' recall presented based on DSM-5 as:

	Autism Spectrum Disorder, Level 1
	Obsessive Compulsive Personality Tendencies

The name of this condition was so lazily formed.  Much of what has repeatedly
been pathologised by those without any lived experience amounts to harmless
self soothing or communication gaps (and there are at least two sides to every
exchange, so we need to keep it real and call out the allistic responsibility
shared regarding these breakdowns).  While claiming overwhelmingly common
threads in our outlook with respect to justice, agency, and empathy, the ways
our environment and resulting behavior trends disable us do very little in the
way of accurately describing a vast array of experiences and perspectives.  We
have a different neuron wiring plan, no big whoop.  The left and right amygdala
failed to connect in a typical way and found other pathways for sharing vital
information within the brain.  Overly optimized systems, or those overtly tuned
to a contrary purpose, tend to fail under such load and this has played out in
tragic comedy as neurotypical reaction to pandemic life.

There are clusters of co-occurring conditions typically experienced by autistic
people, but severity labels (apart from missing the mark entirely) are typically
used by those blind to this reality and the very dynamic nature of how abled one
is from moment to moment.  My take so far is that the most-feared aspects of
autism amount to medical disablities also presenting in allistic populations.
The most disabling feature of a life autistic for many adults has not been
physical deformity, but social oppression seeking to enforce a mythical normal;
systems and infrastructure built fully ignorant to their common needs; effects
of a total lack of willingness to hold space embracing uncommon or undesirable
ways of being.

Writ large by those dubbing themselves allies amidst gnashing of teeth at how
much suffering *they* face at the hands of this so called monstrous calamity,
pathologizing the most benign of behaviors in their suffering offspring while
shouting over adults with lived experience who in chorus (using approaches
ranging from gentle to bombastic) admonish them to adopt simple and effective
behavioral changes of their own.  For something only diagnosed via behavioral
indicators we've allowed quite a broad brush to paint over speculation and bias
by employing the haughty medicalized nature of the language used in describing
others' lives instead of raising up those different, and at times challenging,
voices to speak for themselves.

With a cursory glance at Autism Advocacy, all focus would seem to be on
prevention and cures.  Let me assure you these practices equate to eugenics,
torture, and murder.  Spend some time on a dive into web search results on Ole
Ivar LÃ¸vaas if you're finding it difficult to come along with me on this....

  <patiently breathes, stims, and collects thoughts to continue>

Lacking proof otherwise (no genes have been isolated, etc.) I rest easy in my
lately acquired knowledge and personal experience when I assert my claim that
while being autistic makes me different than most people around me, it is not
the source of the disorder in my life.  That spectre is owned solely by those
who, at various times and places, have abused, neglected, or otherwise worked
to diminish my standing in whatever group we found ourselves cohabiting.

Am I disabled?  You bet.  Is it autism?  Nope.  Being othered wins that prize.

