
Facilitated Growth (original draft)
===================================

Writing prompts from the Naropa University graduate admissions process


How are you prepared to participate in this distinctive community?
------------------------------------------------------------------

I've long been committed to the advancement and centering of marginalized people.
It began, as many things do, in a selfish pursuit of comfort.  I've known why
some people hate me since high school (when I came out as bi).  Terrifying
experience during undergraduate studies expanded the depth of that understanding
to include bi erasure and medical gaslighting.  Decades of professional
experience furthered awareness even more to include subtle yet pernicious ways
people attack and manipulate others for their own advantage.  Only very recently
has my lifelong autodidactic bent revealed answers I've longed for since early
youth, and that delay was largely because nobody around me had any experience
with things that weren't widely considered normal within those communities.
Embracing neurodiversity and the realities of multiple marginalization and
disability in my own life shook me to the core, I'm still only barely waking up
from a 40 year struggle.  I intend to share this perspective whenever and
wherever my audience is both receptive and needful of the lessons I've learned,
while continuing to devote effort to expanding my own understanding and capacity
for helping others.


How would your goals be reached by attending the program?
---------------------------------------------------------

As someone who desired nothing more than to become a professional student when
they first earned a degree, I never have put all the pieces into play.  Debt and
gaslighting took me on journeys I'd rather forget, so I focused on earning (and
backpacking, cycling, and kayaking to unwind).  When my body stopped being able
to handle the extra hours it took to keep apace of my peers I felt desperate.
By that point I'd been seeking counsel from my partner of 12 years for ways our
relationship could support a career change to no avail.  I was ultimately
rejected when my ex could not bear to witness pride and joy in knowing myself
and my neurotribe more fully.  She railed about not accepting any more labels
any time I suggested something I learned about myself might also apply to her.

Around the same time I had to fire my neurodivergent psychologist for focusing
on pathology and domination rooted in criminal justice system experience (as
opposed to the map we had laid out together when we started our sessions).  This
was especially shocking and disorienting, given that I chose her office very
specifically because we shared similar late life diagnosis.  Already on a steep
downhill slope into financial ruin, having paid the costs of professional
diagnosis and counseling out of pocket, I focused inward and set to work on
refining a vision for the future.

It was my second entrepreneurial opportunity since being unable to work for a
year that happened to be the catalyst in honing my goal setting.  Asked to
ponder my Why(s)? (e.g. what is my purpose?) during a presentation on the
business model I punched out a bullet list ending in: GARDENING.  It wasn't
until I read back in my journal a few days later that I fully realized what it
meant to me.  Beginning recovery from severe burnout began in my yard.  With
experience landscaping and growing produce I measured physical stamina by how
long it took to exhaust myself or how much pain I could endure while maintaining
a yard that was already a decade long project space nearing fulfillment of its
original design.  The depth of motivation I held to complete the work before
having to abandon the property I had hoped to make my forever home was profound.
It was precisely the multi-sensory experience, measuring my balance and strength
against previous similar effort, which allowed me the most productive personal
work.

My prior career lent me the skills to tackle any technical need of a small
business, the experience I've had mentoring junior team members solidified the
variety of expression and acceptance needed to allow for holding space for
others' growth, and continued development of the perspective gained through
several years of self-advocacy has established the need for multiply
marginalized clinicians providing professional services.  I long to provide that
safe harbor, helping others move beyond oppression.  Credentials resulting from
study with psychotherapy leaders would lend much needed support to my purpose:
provide accessible and therapeutic space for a variety of neurodivergent needs.


Describe your inspiration, intention, and commitment to studying psychotherapy.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Nihil de nobis sine nobis!  This slogan borrowed from disability activists means
nothing about us without us.  Ever since I can remember, I've loved digging deep
into meaning and perception with someone during intimate conversation.
Challenging assumptions, questioning data sources, validating actions already
taken toward a goal ... all part and parcel of the path that led me here.  I
have already been doing the work, albeit in a possibly clumsy and uninformed way.
Bearing witness to Aha! Moments, hearing acknowledgement and similar experience
echoing back news of growth and newfound depths of understanding; this is what
I find fulfilling.  Even in the midst of painful struggles, these rays of hope
assist me on my own journey.  I am a teacher, an advocate, a wanderer, and I
fully embrace the notion that anyone sitting opposite me can act as a staunch
ally in my own work.  We are on this path together.


Describe your vision of how your education will allow you to be of service in the world:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------

 1) experience with working in service to others, as a professional or volunteer, in a mental health or comparable setting and what you have learned about yourself in the process

I understand the world in abstracts.  I see things many hold as absolutes as
fully negotiable.  Other ideas, like Leave No Trace, obviously arise from
constructs we create and our social bonds are the network upon which that
noble tenet of minimal negative impact is distributed.  Ever since learning
from Outward Bound instructors about the possibilities resident in the
simple choice to leave behind only the best for those who follow, I have been
that oddball picking up any trash encountered and share the philosophy backing
my actions whenever possible.  I could do so with more joy, but I may never have
learned that lesson without engaging in voluntary effort on behalf of perfect
strangers.

What I didn't understand about my first month above timberline going into the
trip was that most of the participants were there by legal mandate.  I had
assumed that the grant secured via essay submission or paying customers would
be the only methods of access.  I was immediately uneasy when I encountered
stony glares all about me as we packed our bags to begin hiking, but found
myself sharing more in common with the juvenile delinquents than anyone coming
from a similar level of privilege by the end of the trip.  This affinity arose
solely from a willingness to hold space with an open mind and heart.  I gladly
embraced that service role and the result was mutual acceptance and progress
toward understanding.  It was only years later that I realized how the grant
winners had been placed intentionally on that trip for just this reason.

Continuing to volunteer wherever I recognized need resulted in many other high
points on my path to the present.  Free Geek (a community service organization
focused on minimizing electronic landfill waste, reuse and recycling of any and
everything possible out of old or discarded devices, donation of tested and
reassembled gear to impoverished community members, and a thrift store for any
with enough money to splurge on hardware) was not a clinic per se, but much of
the work done there could have easily been witnessed in a social worker's
office.  Patient counsel, facilitated self-help programs, collection of donated
food from local businesses for redistribution to those in need....  Here again
I saw myself reflected in those I helped as well as those I looked to for
leadership.

More focused on outdoor experience and developmental disability services, my
time volunteering to aid in promotion or setting up fundraisers or acting as a
chaperone and guide on trips sponsored by Adventures Without Limits opened my
eyes to neurodivergence before I had words for adjacent concepts.  I found
clients to have similar needs and difficulty accessing help.  I saw what an
impact holding space patiently while suspending disbelief or judgement could
make.  I saw an organization, fully devoted to opening doors for those hamstrung
by physical disability, adapting gear to allow parapalegic people to join river
rafting trips.

Ultimately, the most impactful lessons came when I identified with the struggle
I witnessed.  I realized how much more similar than different people appear to
be when vulnerability and intimacy are supported and encouraged.



 2) lessons learned about power and privilege and how this will inform your future career

I was recently introduced to the concept of white people chairs.  I found the
discussion to perfectly encompass the basic lack of understanding and
perspective at the root of White Privilege.  One of the examples used to
illustrate and explain was tourists on safari, or visiting remote villages, who
demanded "proper chairs" when presented with mats on the ground or simple
stools.  The place of honor afforded to strangers by those indigenous to the
region is not often recognized as such by outsiders seeking entertainment and
distraction from their "civilized pursuits" because it doesn't come presented
within the defaults they assume.  These defaults were created by landed gentry
(AKA imperialists and colonialists) without a whiff of consideration or even
inquiry into opposing viewpoints.  I think of it as the pursuit of "proper" at
all costs; a very narrow world view indeed.

Ever a lover of language and the power of open communication, I have often been
accused of taking things too literally or twisting meaning to my own ends.  The
respect I hold for semantic value comes out of a deep appreciation for the
awesome variety and depth of meaning that is often overlooked by anyone unaware
of the latent capacity for clarification or harm in every phrase uttered.  I am
also and often unusually direct, I eschew social hierarchy whenever possible
(knowing it to be completely made up anyway).  This has been my most useful path
to challenging abusers without carrying any of their monkeys on my own back; I
am not ashamed to admit I don't know something and I seek consensus and clarity
whenever possible.

Nevertheless, the allure of power over others seems to be the stuff that makes
the world turn.  Where it isn't brazenly labeled as such the inevitable excuses
for poor behavior come in cheap catch phrases like "a more positive attitude
would make all the difference" or "work within the system to change it" which
produce the net effect of reproducing unhealthy social dynamics for the sake of
not rocking the boat and risking being thrown overboard.  Those in power do not
yield their position without being forced, and protest becomes the only language
heard from oppressed groups.  The fight from disabled rights activists to secure
the ADA and Section 504 accomodation was necessary (and it could easily be
argued is still very much in progress).  Until a clear and undeniable demand for
equitable (not equal) treatment was made, one would not have seen anything other
than the shunning of anyone from neglected populations who was not useful as
inspiration porn.  Too often freedom gets framed as the capacity to do whatever
one desires, as opposed to the securing of individual agency for every single
citizen regardless of their estimated potential to produce value in capitalist
pursuits.

My capacity for observation, analysis, and sitting with discomfort stretch
beyond that of many I encounter in daily life.  It is precisely because I have
often found myself abused or villified that I have honed these skills; they
became necessary tools for professional success.  Unless I came with data to
back up well reasoned arguments and maintain a polite and submissive demeanor
I was not heard.  Assurance from management often came packaged in the phrase
"you have a voice" or "we want you to feel comfortable raising concerns".  These
are empty platitudes.  One would have no need to assure people they had voices
to use if their messages were validated and respected in the first place.  I
aim to encourage unheard voices to protest and demand rights as needed.  I
pledge to break down walls built by holders of privilege.  I will be there to
listen when the safety of private expression is the best path forward.


 3) engagement in working with your own personal process and how these experiences have prepared you for completing the program

As I toil physically I do my best to acheive a meditative state.  When I've
failed I have most often found myself ruminating on a difficult problem.  Any
time those demons run amok I'm left void of the usual fulfillment found in the
effort.  In a combined sensory avoidant and sensory seeking state I discovered
that allowing my body to move more freely depended upon that entire perceptive
feedback loop.  Times that I have studied yoga, tai chi, or sport and the
resulting confidence in my own interoception proved invaluable as I debugged my
broken proprioception.

I'm fond of aphorisms.  I see them as a kind of color swatch of language; enough
meaning to chew on but easily consumed at a surface level.  So much of
interrelating, in my experience, boils down to the moods evoked by these color
swatches in any given conversation.  The impressionist view (blurry, messy,
perhaps even a bit surreal at times) evoked by piecing together color swatches
holds such sway in thin slice judgements and snap decisions for so many.  To the
contrary, I find myself loading the image to that point and waiting to fill in
the remaining detail before aligning with any opinion whenever possible.  I'm an
old dial-up modem from the early days of the internet in that regard.  But in
order to compensate I've learned to hold ready a few swatches to splash out
impressions (if you ever find me quoting a movie, this might be happening).  The
thing is, sometimes all the swatches look wrong under the lamps one has at home.
Holding two contrary ideas simultaneously seems to be the trick.  Allowing for
perspective to shift from multiple view points requires incredible flexibility.


 4) experience with sitting meditation and/or body/mind awareness disciplines

Raised in the Lutheran tradition, I heard the virtue in being of service
extolled from an early age.  One congregation had a pastor who used clowning in
his outreach to young people.  He would speak eloquently of self-giving love to
the adults present, don make-up near the altar, and then with kids' rapt
attention (and desire for balloon animals) he would mime the lesson in utter
silence.  It was one of the most beautiful and broad reaching ministries I've
ever encountered.  The creeds and catechisms left me flat, doubting whether I
could even maintain integrity while attending services.  So I read about other
traditions from around the world; teachings from Buddhist, Hindu, even
Scientology texts were consumed in secret as I mutely mouthed the words I did
not believe to allow my parents to save face with all the kids participating.

Once I graduated with a BA and set out on my own I found plenty of time devoted
to reading about and attempting sitting meditation, but didn't find much by way
of access to knowledgable guides I could relate to.  The key to eventually
stumbling into productive practice was connecting the sensations I observed
while sitting under a tree to those remembered as ways to distract myself from
discomfort during athletic endeavor.  A simple counting loop, or attention to my
fullest possible breaths, allowed for dispassionate observation of my body
without being my body.

Ever since, I've viewed my daily practice as a sort of walking meditation.  In
every moment I strive to maintain a calm centered connection to the source.  Any
disctractions are carefully scrutinized before I take action.  In every moment
I seek to move with intention.


 5) experience with the outdoors, nature, and/or wilderness

My honeymoon in 2003 was a self-guided thru-hike of the Colorado Trail.  My
bride, an outdoor guide and camp counselor, planned out menus, mail drops and
rendezvous as I continued breaking out the mileage into a 6-week itinerary.  We
had taken a few 2 or 3 night backcountry trips together, but neither of us had
ever attempted anything of this scale.

The scope of work was staggering.  We spent everything we had saved until then
so that we could return to jobs waiting on the other end of the summer with a
fresh perspective.  Ultralight gear was just becoming more generally available,
so her employee discount at the local flagship store of a major outdoor
equipment cooperative came in very handy when it came time to outfit the
adventure.

The healing of the discord I felt at the end of my undergrad (my first burnout,
unrecognized at the time, complete with suicidal ideation) was slow going.  A
depression lingered, but several years of rapid career growth made setting aside
time for that work more readily accessible.  By the time we had resupplied a
couple times, feeling the heft of our 40lb packs jump back up to 60lbs or more,
the ick finally melted away.  The trip odometer ticked upward as the Rockies
chiseled our legs and our camera filled with amazing spectacles.  I was, as the
t-shirt my junior high school guidance counselor gave me said, High on Life.

My return to society and the rush of an urban landscape was incredibly difficult
to process.  At night I secreted into a nearby park to sleep, failing to find
any rest within our tiny sweltering one-bedroom.  When I did snooze at all I
was roused by early morning commuter traffic or sprinklers.  I longed for quiet
simplicity above all else.  I felt as though I was forced to inhabit an alien
landscape.

While the first decade of this century was defined by continuous effort reaching
out to find a place I belonged and testing my own limits, the second became much
more about taking space and defining it for myself.  I continued to achieve
every career goal, and considered myself succeeding at adulting, but emptiness
crept back in.  Locating likeminded people who were also interested in spending
time around this odd squad member required exhaustive effort and redefinition.
Nothing I was doing was scalable, but I was following the best advice I got to
the best of my ability.

This is when solo sea kayaking captivated my attention.  With a bonus from work
I bought myself a new boat, paddle, and couple full-day lessons (all designed by
a man who'd been paddling or guiding others for 60 plus years).  Having gained
confidence in handling being alone and self-sufficient in small ways ever since
my Outward Bound trip, and finding it difficult to schedule time to paddle with
others, I began practicing these new skills by spending a week unsupported on
the Willamette River Trail.  I had caught the paddling bug, and everyone at work
was bored with the topic, so I spent weekend mornings putting around on big river
water (e.g. yacht wakes towering overhead at times) and learning about the tidal
affects of the ocean on river waters hundreds of miles inland.  Alone again....


