
Setting the Stage
=================

Our internal wiring plans are different


Emerging Activism
-----------------

I am angry.  I have been angry for a long time, though it is nothing at all
resembling the selfish nationalism or religious persecution of stereotypically
angry white men so often terrorizing nail salons, mosques, and dance halls.  I
continue to be encouraged to use my voice by the very people undercutting it or
projecting over it.  The privilege my appearance yields will only see me safely
past exterior guard shacks; subsequent bosses thwart access the moment they've
registered queer behavior or tasted real honesty backed by data.

My rage rarely boils over.  When it does the expression is likely to be hot,
fast, pointed, and specific.  Once expressed, like a lava flow, immediate
relief of mounting pressure overcomes.  Many times with it remorse at lost
control comes to linger, and wreckage is sorted for lessons.  I know holding
anger is unhealthy; discovery of methods for healthy expression of anger in any
form I find accessible has been fraught to say the least, most often simple
denial or avoidance ruling all who might immediately present aide.

In increasing ways as my pain limits mobility, and compounding lack of exercise
increases my pain, cognitive load in dealing with all of it using acceptable
methods becomes too much to bear alone.  Solitude, the only prescription proven
effective....  Even before pain and inflammation was consistently overwhelming,
de facto reclusion used as a necessary balm has defined my adulthood; it is a
lifestyle much more assigned than chosen.  As associated stress mounts and my
capacity for socializing rapidly diminishes, so too has my individual agency
within society.

Each job I have lost without actively architechting my own departure has been
the result of bullying and exclusion.  Most of those I chose to leave were for
the same reasons.  Popular culture, having adopted petty demand for receipts
backing every claim, is diseased throughout with distrust and policing.  Simple
rare belief at face value is essential for honest connection, and so many are
discarding it like wrapping around morsels distributed by food carts.  Another
dysfunction of the cult of cool which weighs heavily on weary shoulders all too
often: rush.  All is racing, but toward what...?  Every answer varies, and as
such none of them are attainable shared goals.

I finally found them, but the search for a place among my tribe continues....

