
Facilitated Growth
==================

Adapted from a graduate school admission essay


[Lacking Agency](./agency.md 'Previous')
⇜
[Neurodiversity](./README.md 'Main')
⇝
[Setting the Stage](./introduction.md 'Next')


Transpersonal Wilderness Therapy
--------------------------------

I've long been committed to the advancement and centering of marginalized
people.  It began, as many things do, in a selfish pursuit of comfort.  Not
until my forties did my lifelong autodidactic bent reveal answers I'd longed for
since early youth, and that delay was largely because nobody around me had any
experience with things that weren't widely considered normal within those
communities.  Embracing neurodiversity and the realities of multiple
marginalization and disability in my own life shook me to the core.

My prior career lent me the skills to tackle any technical need of a small
business.  The experience I've had mentoring junior team members solidified the
variety of expression and acceptance needed to allow for holding space for
others' growth.  Continued development of the perspective gained through several
years of self-advocacy has convinced me of the need for multiply marginalized
clinicians providing professional services.  I long to provide safe harbor,
helping others move beyond oppression.  Credentials resulting from study with
psychotherapy leaders would lend much needed support to my purpose: provide
accessible and therapeutic space for a variety of neurodivergent needs via
cultivation of a sensory garden and education center.

Nihil de nobis sine nobis!  This slogan borrowed from disability activists means
nothing about us without us.  Ever since I can remember, I've loved digging deep
into meaning and perception with someone during intimate conversation.
Challenging assumptions, questioning data sources, validating actions already
taken toward a goal....  I have always been thus engaged, albeit in a possibly
clumsy and uninformed way.  Bearing witness to Aha! Moments, hearing
acknowledgement and similar experience echoing back news of growth and newfound
depths of understanding; this is what I find fulfilling.  Even in the midst of
painful struggles, these rays of hope assist me on my own journey.  I am a
teacher, an advocate, a wanderer, and I fully embrace the notion that anyone
sitting opposite me may act as a staunch ally or a mirror in my own work.  We
are on this path together.


I understand the world in abstracts.  I see things many hold as absolutes as
fully negotiable.  Other ideas, like Leave No Trace, obviously arise from
constructs we create and our social bonds are the network upon which they are
distributed.  Ever since learning from Outward Bound instructors about the
possibilities resident in the simple choice to leave behind only the best for
those who follow, I have been that oddball picking up any trash encountered.  I
could do so with more joy, but I may never have learned that lesson without
engaging in voluntary effort on behalf of perfect strangers.

What I didn't understand about my first month above timberline going into the
trip was that most of the participants were there by legal mandate.  I had
assumed grants secured via essay submission or direct payment would be the only
methods of access.  I was uneasy at encountering the stony glares all about me
as we packed our bags to begin hiking, but found myself sharing more in common
with those tagged as juvenile delinquents than anyone coming from a similar
level of privilege by the end of the trip.  This affinity arose solely from a
willingness to hold space with an open mind and heart.  I gladly embraced that
service role and the result was mutual acceptance and progress toward
understanding.  It was not until years later that I realized how the grant
winners had been placed intentionally on that trip for just this reason.

Continuing to volunteer wherever I recognized need resulted in many other high
points on my path to the present.  Free Geek (a community service organization
focused on minimizing electronic landfill waste, reuse and recycling of any and
everything possible out of old or discarded devices, donation of tested and
reassembled gear to impoverished community members, and a thrift store for any
with enough money to splurge on hardware) was not a clinic per se, but much of
the work done there could have easily been witnessed in a social work or
counseling office.  Personal advising, facilitated self-help programs,
collection of donated food from local businesses for redistribution to those in
need....  Here again I saw myself reflected in those I helped as well as those I
looked to for leadership.

More focused on outdoor experience and developmental disability services, my
time volunteering to aid in promotion or setting up fund raisers or acting as a
chaperon and guide on trips sponsored by Adventures Without Limits opened my
eyes to neurodivergence before I had words for adjacent concepts.  I found
clients to have similar needs and difficulty accessing help.  I saw what an
impact holding space patiently while suspending disbelief or judgment could
make.  I saw an organization fully devoted to opening doors for people, adapting
gear to accommodate paraplegics on river rafting trips or pairing the
intellectually disabled to volunteers like myself within a tandem kayak fleet in
search of bald eagles.

Ultimately, the most impactful lessons came when I identified with the struggle
I witnessed.  I realized how much more similar than different people appear to
be when vulnerability and intimacy are supported and encouraged.


Ever a lover of language and the power of open communication, I have often been
accused of taking things too literally or twisting meaning to my own ends.  The
respect I hold for semantic value comes out of a deep appreciation for the
awesome variety and depth of meaning that is often overlooked by anyone unaware
of the latent capacity for clarification or harm in every phrase uttered.  I am
also and often unusually direct, I eschew social hierarchy whenever possible
(knowing it to be completely made up anyway).  This has been my most useful path
to behaving as an ally or challenging abusers without carrying any of their
monkeys on my own back; I am not ashamed to admit I don't know something and I
seek consensus and clarity whenever possible.

Perhaps owing to a lifetime of struggle against unacknowledged disability, my
capacity for observation, analysis, and sitting with discomfort stretch beyond
that of most people I encounter in daily life.  It is precisely because I have
often found myself abused or vilified that I have honed these skills; they
became necessary tools for social acceptance or professional success.  Unless I
came with a working prototype to back up well reasoned arguments and maintain a
submissive demeanor I was rarely heard.  Assurance from management often came
packaged in the phrase "you have a voice" or "we want you to feel comfortable
raising concerns", but these are empty platitudes.  One would have no need to
assure people they had voices to use if their messages were validated and
respected in the first place.  I aim to encourage unheard voices to protest and
demand rights as needed.  I pledge to continue breaking down walls built by
holders of privilege.  I will be there to listen without injecting meaning due
to unacknowledged bias and stand ready to be corrected whenever I make a
mistake.


Raised in the Lutheran tradition, I heard the virtue in being of service
extolled from an early age.  One congregation had a pastor who used clowning in
his outreach to young people.  He would speak eloquently of self-giving love to
the adults present, don make-up near the altar, and then with kids' rapt
attention (and desire for balloon animals) he would mime the lesson in utter
silence (barring the rubber squeaks).  It was one of the most beautiful and
broad reaching ministries I've ever encountered.  But the creeds and catechisms
left me flat upon close inspection, doubting whether I could even maintain
integrity while attending services.  So I read about other traditions from
around the world; teachings from Buddhist, Hindu, even Scientology texts were
consumed in secret as I continued to mutely mouth the words I did not believe to
allow my parents to save face with the appearance of all their kids
participating.

Once I graduated with a BA and set out on my own I found plenty of time devoted
to reading about and attempting sitting meditation, but didn't find much by way
of access to knowledgeable guides I could relate to.  The key to eventually
stumbling into productive practice was connecting the sensations I observed
while sitting under the shade of a tree to those remembered as ways to distract
myself from discomfort during athletic endeavor.  A simple counting loop, or
attention to my fullest possible breaths, allowed for dispassionate observation
of my body without being my body.

Ever since, I've viewed my daily practice as a sort of walking meditation.  In
every moment I strive to maintain a calm centered connection to the source.  Any
distractions are carefully scrutinized before I take action.  In every moment I
seek to move with intention.


My honeymoon in 2003 was a self-guided thru-hike of the Colorado Trail.  My
bride planned out menus, mail drops and rendezvous as I continued breaking out
the mileage into a 6-week itinerary.  We had taken a few 2 or 3 night back
country trips together, but neither of us had ever attempted anything of this
scale.  The scope of work was staggering.  We spent everything we had saved
until then so that we could return to jobs waiting on the other end of the
summer with a fresh perspective.  Ultralight gear was just becoming more
generally available, so her employee discount at the local flagship store of a
major outdoor equipment cooperative came in very handy when outfitting the
adventure.

By the time we had resupplied a couple times, feeling the heft of our 40lb packs
jump back up to 60lbs or more, the ick finally melted away.  The trip odometer
ticked upward along with the altitude while the Rockies chiseled our legs and
our camera filled with amazing spectacles.  I was, as the t-shirt my junior high
school guidance counselor gave me said, High on Life.

Our return to society and the rush of an urban landscape was incredibly
difficult to process.  At night I secreted into nearby parks to slumber, failing
to find any rest within our tiny sweltering one-bedroom.  When I did snooze at
all I was roused by early morning commuter traffic or sprinklers.  I longed for
quiet simplicity above all else.  I felt as though I was being forced to inhabit
an alien landscape.

While the first decade of this century was personally defined by continuous
effort, reaching out to find a place I belonged and testing my own limits, the
second became much more about taking space and defining it for myself.  I
continued to achieve every career goal set for myself, and considered myself to
be succeeding at adulting, but emptiness crept back in.  Locating like minded
people who were also interested in spending time around this odd squad member
required exhaustive effort and redefinition.  Nothing I was doing was scalable,
but I was following the best advice I got to the best of my ability.  

The track bike I had scrimped and saved to afford after eschewing car ownership
and commuting everywhere by bike for years was meant to be my key into a
community.  I thought my love for cycling, the personal struggle to overcome
inertia, might be enough to finally secure a place among a thriving and health
focused scene.  Not so, unfortunately.  The upset at realizing the velodrome was
just as hostile an environment as anywhere else I'd searched for belonging was
intense.  In some ways that sting still lingers; I've barely ridden these last
few years.

This is when solo sea kayaking captivated my attention.  With a bonus from work
I bought myself a new boat, paddle, and couple full-day lessons (all designed by
a man who'd been paddling or guiding others for 60 plus years).  Having gained
confidence in handling being alone and self-sufficient in small ways ever since
my Outward Bound trip, and finding it difficult to schedule time to paddle with
others, I honed these new skills by spending a week each summer unsupported
along the Willamette River Trail.  I had caught the paddling bug, and everyone
at work was quickly bored with the topic (just as they had become bored by my
cycling stories), so I spent weekend mornings putting around on big river water
(e.g. yacht wakes towering overhead at times) and learning about the tidal
affects of the ocean on flows hundreds of miles inland.  Alone again, except for
the odd sea lion or seal that would cruise just out of reach of my hull as I
bobbed on the surface sipping my coffee, I watched osprey hunt and startled
herons into flight despite endeavoring to silently pass, all before most park
users had arrived.

Then the pandemic landed.  My favorite put-in locations were all closed to the
public.  I was without a way to process my increasingly complex distress in any
way that would generally be considered healthy.  Without support, I encountered
ableists at every turn taking words from the disability activist community and
cheapening them with newly exposed fights against restriction or personal
responsibility.  My introspection deepened with mounting burnout.

Protests flared.  Acknowledging my privilege only served to further alienate me
from peers from whom I was seeking acceptance.  The more I learned about myself
and the problems caused by things I'd been taught were defaults for everyone,
the more I came to distrust all around me.  Everything except natural processes
fell away; germination, growth, decay, and rest yielded perfect examples of the
changes happening within myself.  In a combined sensory avoidant and sensory
seeking state I discovered that allowing my body to move more freely depended
upon that entire perceptive feedback loop.  Times that I have studied yoga, tai
chi, or sport and the resulting confidence in my own interoception proved
invaluable as I debugged my broken proprioception.

Established gardens don't change much over time.  It is easy to be distracted by
the cycle of seasons.  I’ve found it important to remember avoidance of judgment
based on isolated pieces of larger systems.  Mutual understanding yields
beautiful fruit aplenty.  Rigidity and bullish insistence on "the right way" to
do things destroys.  With experience landscaping and growing produce I measured
physical stamina by how long it took to exhaust myself or how much pain I could
endure while maintaining a yard that was already a decade long project space
nearing fulfillment of its original design.  It was precisely this multi-sensory
experience, measuring my balance and strength against previous similar effort,
which allowed me the most productive personal work.

Having recently been introduced to the concept of white people chairs, I found
the discussion to perfectly encompass the basic lack of understanding and
perspective at the root of White Privilege as well as my own disability.  One of
the examples used to illustrate and explain was tourists on safari, or visiting
remote villages, who demanded "proper chairs" when presented with mats on the
ground or simple stools.  The place of honor afforded to strangers by those
indigenous to the region is not often recognized as such by outsiders seeking
entertainment and distraction from their "civilized pursuits" because it doesn't
come presented within the defaults they assume as common sense.  I think of it
as the pursuit of "proper" at all costs; a very narrow world view indeed.

Every individual view of an ideal garden will vary; we all bring our own trauma
and bias with us wherever we go.  Welcoming others into sensory environments
supportive of their personal work is my dream.



See also: [original draft of responses to required talking points](./education.md)
